welcome back everyone Laszlo Montgomery
here the history of China Vietnam
relations part three last time we got as
far as the lamentable ending of the Tong
dynasty still have miles to go before
bow ties abdication I'll try and pick up
the pace a little thanks for sticking
with the program and to everyone who has
remained true to the CHP going back 199
episodes ago to June of 2010 a special
thanks to you my core my base what it
past eight years it's been some good
times we're sure had well by me anyway
we ended up last episode in the quagmire
of the nan Chao Kingdom that was an area
that combined all the hill tribes and
power centers spread out over today's
Yunnan Myanmar and Laos mostly you not
that one's hard to explain so 865 the
Tang Dynasty even back on their heels
like they were by this time mustered up
the strength to take back their capital
at Dai ly modern-day Hanoi now in the
Tong Protectorate of uh Nam not taking
any chances they built a wall around the
city four and a half miles in
circumference with an 18 foot wide moat
but Tang China at one time they were one
of the premier civilizations on the
planet but end of the ninth century they
were coming in for a hard landing and
the rest of China with them and once
they were officially gone in 907 their
former protectorate and UNAM broke free
of their reigns and local clans who were
always chafing against tong imperial
rule acted independently and defied what
had been the norm for already 200 years
for the mean time Vietnam was left to
its own devices with local powers all
trying to out backstab the other this is
what always happened China would get
distracted with some national crisis in
this case the disintegration of the
Empire and Vietnam used that state of
affairs to shake loose from them and
attempt to build something of their own
tong China broke up into an era known
as the Five Dynasties and ten kingdoms
period and by the sound of that name
it's safe to assume China was not a
unified Empire anymore and had broken
down into a series of five dynasties in
the north and ten competing states down
in the South in this disunion lasted
until 979 nineteen years into the
milestone year of 960 that marked the
founding of the Song Dynasty it took a
while but Jo Kuan Yin got them all
that's coming later on the Viet people
however didn't get to enjoy their
holiday from China for that long if you
look at a map of China during this
washer Gua period five five dynasties
ten kingdoms period you'll notice the
kingdom at the southernmost point was
called southern Han it encompassed most
of Guangdong Hainan and southern Guang
XI the part that ran along the northern
border of Vietnam which is not called
Vietnam yet that comes later a
treacherous plot in the Viet capital led
to one faction seizing power in this
group sent a request to the southern Han
Emperor asking for some military support
for their side the southern Han ruler
based in Guangzhou decided to move in on
the former Tung Protectorate of UNAM
beginning in 930 the southern Han forces
went in to establish some semblance of
order and pick up in Vietnam where the
Tang Dynasty had left off but try as
they might southern Han troops could
never fully put out the fires and amidst
this unrest in northern Vietnam rose the
son of a very high up Tung official
serving down in the Red River region and
this son followed his father's footsteps
into the government and gravitated
towards a military career and got
himself recognized for his abilities and
this was another a list hero of the
Vietnamese people know Gwynn in Chinese
that's wooshin the southern Han military
decided to make an all-out effort to go
in and permanently quell these
disturbances and in the landmark year of
nine
thirty-eight the two sides engaged in
battle no Gwen rose to the fore and took
command in this dark hour to lead the
defense against the southern Han forces
he had a lot of time to prepare for this
moment and head earlier been tipped off
as far as what the southern han battle
strategy was so when the southern Han
military came and full force he was
ready
no Gwen knew the Chinese forces were
gonna sail up the buck bang River in
order to penetrate the Delta region and
carry out their invasion of the area
that is today the city of Hanoi you know
this moment in Vietnam history
well it isn't anything like Washington's
Crossing the Delaware on Christmas night
1776 but as far as the mythology or
national legends go this story of the
First Battle of the buck bang River is
just as glorious the mouth of this river
the buck bang is right near the
beautiful tourist site of halong bay and
just north of Haiphong the southern Han
ended up getting out strategized and
outfought and at this battle of the buck
bang river they were soundly defeated by
the forces led by mo Gwen knowing with a
high degree of certainty that the
southern Han ships would sail up the
buck dang when the tide was low no Gwen
had large wooden pikes tipped with sharp
iron points embedded deep into the
riverbed slanting upriver
no Gwen observed that this particular
body of water when it was high tide
there was no way to see this gauntlet of
sharp pikes beneath the surface at low
tide however they became visible and no
vessel could get past them everything
went according to plan indeed just as
low Qin predicted the southern Han
forces sailed up the buck bang River at
high tide towards the capital they were
oblivious to the trap being laid and
chased the Viet forces who were carrying
out a strategic retreat luring them
deeper and deeper upriver to assert
point sure enough at low tide the
oversized southern Han vessels were left
stranded and became easy targets for
Lowell Quinn's army and then they
realized their predicament the southern
Han vessels attempted to about-face but
got all tangled up with these deadly
barriers laid out across the river that
prevented their retreat caught between
the Viet Army and unable to retreat
because of the deadly trap laid by mo
Qin the Chinese forces got destroyed by
this ruse and the via troops fell on the
helpless southern Han Army totally a
one-sided battle the song buck dang buck
dang Reaver the by tung chung in vietnam
history was not only the site of this
battle between southern Han and Viet
forces led by mo Quin in 938 two more
times in 981 and a third time in 1288
this historic River witnessed epic and
deciding battles against their northern
neighbor three times over the last
millennium Vietnam was able to break
free from China's domination of the red
river plane and when mo Quinn's army
defeated the southern Han forces hit
finally put an end to this almost 1000
year on-again off-again Chinese
domination over Vietnam going back to
111 BCE when child was 9 your kingdom
fell to the Western Han you remember the
drum sisters shook them off between 39
and 43 seee but China was able to recall
and until Lee Nam day was able to again
reassert Vietnamese sovereignty over
this land but we recall from last
episode that Lee Nam days Lee dynasty
fell to the tongue and 602 and that
commenced this third period of Chinese
domination over Vietnam and with
southern Hans defeat in 938 the third
period of domination ended there's gonna
be one more time when Vietnam falls
under China's control but we'll get to
that next episode once the smoke cleared
no Gwen
declared himself king and set his
capital up at the old lock fortress of
gold law once again located in historic
Hanoi the southern Han government
admitting defeat recognize this new
independent regime the following year in
939 and in that year the first real
Vietnamese dynasty began no Gwynne
became known as no voom voom of course
means King Gwang and whoa boom called
his new realm dive yet dye you're a
Mandarin free of the Chinese yoke at
last but the Millennium of impact China
had had on Vietnam culturally and
politically still remained up until this
time in the 10th century whatever you
wanted to know about Vietnam came from
Chinese sources but starting here
no dynasty Vietnamese started writing
their own histories in their own
language in addition to these official
histories all kinds of other literary
work began appearing that discuss
Confucianism Buddhism and Taoism the
Vietnamese language was still evolving
but that didn't stop the poets of all
local literary talents of the day around
this time three more tones were added to
Vietnamese bringing the 10th century
total up to six which is where I believe
it's at right now Chinese the language
that is was hardly abandoned though for
anything of a political legal or
diplomatic nature classical Chinese was
still the lingua franca of Vietnam
everything was still written in Chinese
characters but the Vietnamese language
though heavily flavored with Chinese
words and sounds here became the
official language of the Viet Court the
dive yet may have rid themselves of the
Chinese in 938 but they still had to
deal with other regional antagonize errs
hill tribes to the west as well as an
aggressive Champa Kingdom to the south
but it was internal strife that led to
an our key that ultimately brought down
the mode
dynasty they had a limited power center
and were never able to project power
beyond the small Red River Delta core
region another big reason that didn't
allow the Vietnamese to savor this
victory for long was that after his
triumph in 938 the heroic founder no
Quinn did not live long
he died in 944 and I don't know how many
times we heard this before following the
death of a monarch there followed a
succession crisis a nasty period of the
usual murder and moving around the chess
pieces the upshot was at the mo dynasty
fell under the rule of twelve warlords
who control different parts of dive yet
all up and down the Red River after more
than twenty years of this unstable
violent and poison the state of affairs
this period of the twelve Lords as it's
called came to a crescendo between 966
to 968 one of these twelve Lords was
named din Bolin he was the son of a
general who fought for law when he
fought against and ultimately defeated
the other eleven independent Lords and
emerged from this 24 year period of
civil strife as the greatest power he
seized the throne moved the capital and
in 968 established a short-lived dynasty
the din dynasty the na Dhin he started
off as a king but ended up as an emperor
declaring himself ding ding wong
ting-kwong day being the vietnamese for
Huangdi emperor he was Viet Nam's
first-ever
homegrown Emperor remember child hua was
the first emperor of Vietnam but he came
from ho Bay he was Han Chinese didn't
ball in played for the home team he's
credited with instituting a whole slew
of reforms to the land Chinese style
reforms but with Vietnamese
characteristics so you could say China
in the meantime was getting back on its
feet from all the years of chaos that
began in the tongue in the mid a century
they went through a hard time but by 960
was unified under the song well there
was eight more years of mopping up but
this late into the 10th century its
northern song time and when the song
court had the time to look to the
southernmost reaches of their empire
they did not accept didn't boil in as an
emperor they tolerated his royal title
but referred to him still as the king of
UNAM and his land as a vassal kingdom of
song china not as an independent kingdom
this was how the song court addressed
him in all official diplomatic
communication they never recognised him
as an emperor well not to get too bogged
down in Vietnam history here I'm trying
to keep it relative to China both didn't
Bolin and his son and heir were
assassinated in 979 and at this moment
of political crisis down there for this
budding dynasty a neat and orderly
succession did not happen and that as
far as we know from world history that's
usually the kiss of death for a dynasty
and I'll tell you right now that's what
happened and didn't boy Lin's case as
well as his din dynasty the next hero to
emerge from Vietnam history well I'm
just naming the marquee stars there were
a lot more of course this one was a
general who served under Dinh Berlin
named lai-wan he rose to the fore at a
moment of crisis for Vietnam when the
song armies seeing what was going on
down there following the royal
assassination started getting some ideas
and being the most powerful domestic
force at this time lay one seized power
and declared himself emperor in 980 and
he called his dynasty the early lay and
it lasted till 1009 with the
establishment of this dynasty lay one
assured in a period of viet independence
nobodies province free from the man the
land was now called die call via but
doubting that lai-wan had what it took
to hold it all together the two powers
to the north and south china and Champa
they began making battle plans to bring
the lady honesty to a speedy conclusion
song arm is seeing the political
crisis with the new dynasty started
marching on Vietnam immediately at late
989 81 once again the Chinese imperial
navy headed up the same bok-dong river
that the southern Han navigated back in
938 with disastrous results it was a
smaller force this time but still
formidable lai-wan led his armies well
and used the home field advantage
brilliantly defeating the song in this
second battle of the buck bang River
another bitter defeat for the Chinese
military history repeats the song
military had executed a two-pronged
attack by land and sea and they both got
thwarted it was a humiliating defeat for
the sole military in Vietnam and both
generals did not survive the punishment
meted out to them by the second song
Emperor tight song an even bigger
headache for Lai wons new dynasty wasn't
dealing with armies from Champa
they were always rivals the north and
south of Vietnam the people living at
Viet Nam's geographic South they weren't
the same as the northerners any more
than your average Yellow River Valley
Han Chinese was to the dread down in
southernmost China well back then anyway
there hadn't been enough mixing yet
between north and south to reach some
sort of equilibrium so Champa was Hindu
and Indian influenced and in the north
with the developing Viet culture it was
Buddhist and more Chinese influenced
after the Chinese Navy went down in
defeat the second time on the back
downriver
you can bet lai-wan gathered up his
forces and marched straight down to
Champa for a nice punitive expedition
Champa had teamed up with China to put
an end to the ladyness tea a lot of bad
blood existed between the rulers of
Champa and died Col Viet the Viet forces
led by lawan went into Champa and sacked
the place and return home with vast
amounts of captured riches and spoils of
war with song emperor tides own seething
up in Chi Fung lai-wan decided to put on
a May
jur charm offensive to try and appease
this younger brother of the song founder
jo kwon eun-hee sent tribute to the song
court offering all the best dyke of it
had to offer he did everything he could
appear the benign friend of China
exchanging visits and always being
cordial looking the other way when they
you know tried to put him in his place
by not referring to him by his title
however lay one like Lord McCartney in
1793 didn't want to bend the knee to the
song Emperor he drew the line there for
the meanwhile during this early lay and
die Cove yet and in song China
circumstances on both sides allowed
China and Vietnam to remain the best of
frenemies at least from the meanwhile on
the home front lay one did what he could
over his quarter century reigned spiff
up the land organize it administer it
and attend to all the rituals and
ceremonies required of them his dynasty
however didn't have much lasting power
beyond his reign once he died in 1005
and after a short reign of terror by his
sadistic and degenerate son a commander
of the palace guard put this Vietnamese
Caligula in the royal court out of its
misery then four years later in 1009 it
was all over for the early laid ina ste
an official in the lay government
emerged from the rubble named Li Gong
wood though he's better known in
Vietnamese history by his regnal name Li
Taito that typo or Tai zu name tells you
he was the founder of a dynasty so it
was out with the early lay and in its
place came the late early it's called
late early to differentiate it from the
early Li 5:44 to 602 you recall earlier
in episode 2 I mentioned Li be better
known as Li nom de who shook off the
formidable Liang dynasty
and set up his own independent state the
kingdom of vang soon in 544 misses also
referred to as the early Li now you had
the late early
as was the Emperor's prerogative he
moved the capital back to die la of
course one of the many names for
different districts of the city we know
today as Hanoi he renamed his city Tang
lung Cheung long rising dragon this was
in 1010 and in this act of declaring the
establishment of Tang lung Li tight
though got himself written into the
history books as the founder of Hanoi
with the air ten ten being the year of
the city's official founding still had
several more centuries to go before it
starts showing up on the map says Hanoi
the name in Mandarin means within the
rivers the dough lick and doom rivers
specifically founding Emperor Li Taito
reigned 1009 to 1028 and got to enjoy
the moment when Vietnam hit its first
very own golden age that is to say
relative to previous times there was
with the exception of a resurgence
Champa general peace economic prosperity
and a stable royal court and no Chinese
armies banging down the door Li tight
though at first ruled the land as an
old-style King but in time he oversaw
the creation and construction of a whole
big Chinese style Imperial bureaucracy
that more like its inspiration up north
outlived monarch and survived from King
to King and dynasty to Dynasty under the
previous lay dynasty central authority
had degraded to an Eastern Jo dynasty
kind of a situation the farther from the
capital one wandered the less sway the
King had lead those first order of
business was to consolidate his domain
and his power over everyone quoting
author Ben Kiernan regarding the later
Lee dynasty he said it had quote forged
a new via political culture that mingled
indigenous spirit worship with Buddhism
Taoism Confucianism other cultural
influences and elements of Hinduism from
Champa
end quote another major play
in the region who was just now starting
to get real big was the Khmer Empire
just west of champa modern-day Cambodia
the Li tried to make nice with them and
maintain good relations this c'mere land
was what the Vietnamese had previously
called Jin lop in Chinese John lot and
that was the area around the former
kingdom of foon on Mekong Delta and to
the west of there Lee tae tho needed
good relations further south in order to
be able to focus on the latest round of
wars with Champa in fact if you look at
Vietnam history from the earliest times
those who were in charge of the Red
River Valley and the people gradually
developing up and down the plain it was
always a case of balancing relations
with China with Champa with Lin Yi or
chenla or these tribesmen who lived in
the hills to the west of northern
Vietnam in present-day Laos
each was always trying to get a piece of
that land watered by the Red River it
was a never-ending state of affairs for
whoever ruled in Hanoi trying to
maintain a balance that posed the least
threat to the Viet people and with the
visit in early March 2018 of all 332
meters of the USS Carl Vinson this
balancing act still goes on today while
Lee pytho was distracted in Champa and
after enough time had passed since the
song military got whipped at the last
battle of the BOK bang River
beginning in 1075 there was yet a new
call that went out in Chi Fung that the
time was right to give it one more try
to take back this northern Vietnam
territory it was none other than the
great reforming Chancellor Huang unsure
who personally advised the song shun
song Emperor that with Vietnam weakened
and not paying attention there was never
a better time than the present than to
go in and reassert control over this
wayward province who again had the
audacity to call their leader an emperor
what followed became known as the Li
song war
Mandarin the song yeah she Ning Chang
Chun does raged from ten seventy five to
ten seventy seven China's opening move
was to use their influence to and force
an embargo that prevented any trade with
Vietnam Lee paid no saw what was
happening and felt ill he had to carry
out some kind of preemptive strike to
counter what he knew was an imminent
invasion from song he first led a
hundred thousand via troops up into
Guang XI to the present-day capital of
nan Ning was called young back then and
after a 42 day siege the city fell and
there was wholesale slaughter and nan
Ning committed by troops led by Li tied
those most trusted general leepung get
Li Chang Jia and Mandarin it was quite a
punch in the face to the song the song
emperor's response to the defeat and nan
Ning was to teach Vietnam a lesson so
they gathered up three hundred thousand
soldiers and marched south and the
direction of the dico Viet capital of
Tang lung
allied with China never passing up on an
opportunity where the Champa and Khmer
armies it was a brutal three years with
both sides sustaining heavy losses
generally poem get another a list hero
from vietnam history defeated everything
that was thrown at him the chinese
losses of human life had already added
up to the hundreds of thousands and
after the song army threw in the towel
gave up and headed back north lead poem
get went down and ran roughshod over
Champa teaching them not to team up with
china against dico yet lead punk it is
perhaps better known for the famous
patriotic poem that really shakes a fist
at china and says stay out of my lands
this was called by some historians Viet
Nam's first declaration of independence
in Chinese the poem is called non Guang
Shan huh Nam GU sung ha this is the
Vietnamese version of UFA
Wanhua cochon in the 12th century we
featured UFA in CHP episode 95 the best
strategy and this was adopted by most
all viet rulers was always to try and
find some way to work things out with
china and this is what ended up
happening in this case they both took a
step back from the brink and in the end
to keep the peace dico viet he had to
let go with two provinces that are today
part of vietnam and located just south
of the guanxi border li thunk it now he
no there was no stop in china for good
and the capital at Tang long had already
been threatened several years later by
1082 the lis ruler returned lands that
had been seized from China and by the
year 1080 for well everything was not
exactly lovey dovey but both sides
managed to keep the peace and to define
the borders where Vietnam ended and
Guang XI and Yunnan began and these
borders they agreed to during the final
year of emperor xuanzong's reign they
pretty much stayed that way all the way
into modern times by the end of the 11th
century song china was starting to sweat
from the saber-rattling of their
ambitious northern neighbors the
Jurchens this helped ensure that dico
viet wouldn't be harassed by any Chinese
armies for the time being while Emperor
Wei Zhong and the Song Dynasty were
distracted by the Jurchens the Lee
dynasty enjoyed a nice golden age by
1164 though the now southern Song
Emperor Shao Tong well he formally
acknowledged Vietnam as a kingdom rather
than as a part of the province of GL
which is what they always considered it
as by the time of the 5th or 6th emperor
of the Li dynasty things were starting
to wind down by the 7th Emperor and 1175
the dynasty's best days were well behind
them by the eleven 90s a powerful and
influential family down in dico Viet
infiltrated the halls of power through
marriage and began to bulk up their
present
at the Royal Court this family was the
powerful gun clan who long ago had made
their way to these Red River Delta lands
from Fujian province the crown prince
who became the final ly dynasty emperor
had married the daughter of Drummle the
patriarch of the drun family during the
Lee dynasty the Jun's were like a
Fujiwara s-- in Japan intermarrying into
the Royal Lee family constantly and
wielding great power and influence
because of that the final li Emperor's
wife the Empress no she was not the
backseat driver type she asserted
herself quite aggressively and used her
power to place enough of her Jang
relatives in powerful positions so that
in October 1224 her husband the Emperor
decided to abdicate in favor of the most
powerful force in the government at that
time John Kudo head of the Royal Guard
john kudo is another headlining hero
from vietnam history even though yet a
ruthless side about him once he put an
end to the already greatly diminished
Lee dynasty he had any and all surviving
Lee family Royals murdered not the first
time anyone did that throughout world
history there were a lot of rulers and
many civilizations who felt compelled to
do this kind of housecleaning in short
it was a very messy cloak-and-dagger
transition from Lee to Gen John who
though emerged as the most powerful
force but utilized his power from behind
the throne ruling through the first John
Emperor conveniently still a child named
chun-tae dong this nephew of dren Fudo
was married to a daughter from the Lee's
and this little boy Emperor drunk I'd
thumb grows up and ends up having a very
formidable run as a dynasty founder
reigning from twelve twenty five to
twelve fifty eight at the time of the
founding of the John dynasty the
population of Vietnam which at this time
in history was essentially the Red River
plain and Delta was about 1.2 million in
a century
that number will double that's always a
good sign of a successful dynasty piece
good harvests and a thriving economy
sometimes that's all it takes
the drums brought back the Chinese style
civil service exams that were based on
the Confucian classics it had been done
away with in 1096 during the previous
dynasty in the history of Chinese
philosophy series we saw how in China
the Confucian literati class sprang
forth from among the unemployed shirt or
Knights whose feudal lord had been
deposed from this group of knights
emerged the ROO school of thought and
later on the whole Confucian based civil
service and government administration in
Vietnam this Confucian literati group
came from the rich peasants who were not
major landowners but rather small and
medium-sized rich enough not to have to
work and who could afford a classical
Confucian education just like anyone
else in the North the Tran dynasty gets
the dubious distinction of being the
ruling family at the time of the mongol
urine dynasty invasions of vietnam the
reason why there isn't much mention of
china in the 13th century was that the
middle kingdom was under a great deal of
stress from this frightful neighbor to
the north the mongols
and they're just about to unleash their
armies all over china the 13th century
and the mongols and world history go
hand in hand
they were definitely the biggest thing
to happen during that bloody hundred
years chp episodes 169 170 from back in
2016 we looked at the mongol you're in
dynasty tamo jean was born in 1162 he
did in the Shi sha by 1227 did o to the
once invincible Church in Jin dynasty in
1234 then the Mongols took Tibet in 1240
Dali and Yunnan in 1254 remember the
successor kingdom to nan Chao then the
southern song got trounced after a hell
of a fight in 1279 but for all intents
and purposes in 1271 it was all over for
this once great southern dynasty that
rose a
the ashes of the decimated northern song
that was when Kublai Khan established
the yeren dynasty 1271
and with China now out of the way you
know who was next so rather than get
into that right now let's just say class
dismissed
next episode we'll see what happened to
the jaw and dynasty I'll give you a hint
they hang in there until 1400 more on
the runs next time I assure you what
else is there to say recorded history
podcast network ladies and gentlemen's
gaining in size and respectability even
as we speak
recorded history dotnet I'm there Ray
Harris juniors there steve Silverman
from the you IP useless information
podcast got him to almost two dozen
history podcasters already now I don't
want to brag or anything but I made it
to the top 20 of the whole platform
recorded history dotnet go check that
out
don't worry no one's gonna ask you for
any money I remember the days when it
was just history according to Bob dan
Carlin Mike Duncan Lars Brown worth cam
Riley and few others involved in this
trade now everybody wants to be a
history podcaster not a lot of barriers
to entry into this industry okay that's
going to be about it for me this time
Lazlo Montgomery here bidding everyone
in 10000 countries around the world a
fond farewell part for next time be
there or be square take care everyone
you